docs/src/architectures/nativepet.rst, before:

.. _architecture-nativepet:

NativePET (experimental)
========================

.. warning::

  This is an **experimental model**. You should not use it for anything important.

NativePET is a cleaner, more user-friendly reimplementation of the original
PET model :footcite:p:`pozdnyakov_smooth_2023`. It is designed for better
modularity and maintainability, while preseving compatibility with the original
PET implementation in ``metatrain``. It also adds new features like long-range
features, better fine-tuning implementation, a possibility to train on
arbitrarty targets, and a faster inference due to the ``fast attention``.

Installation
------------

To install NativePET and its dependencies, run the following from the root of the repository:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install metatrain[nativepet]

This will install the model along with necessary dependencies.

Default Hyperparameters
-----------------------

The default hyperparameters for the NativePET model are:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../src/metatrain/experimental/nativepet/default-hypers.yaml
   :language: yaml

Tuning Hyperparameters
----------------------

NativePET offers a number of tuning knobs for flexibility across datasets:

The default hyperparameters above will work well in most cases, but they
may not be optimal for your specific dataset. In general, the most important
hyperparameters to tune are (in decreasing order of importance):

- ``cutoff``: This should be set to a value after which most of the interactions between
  atoms is expected to be negligible. A lower cutoff will lead to faster models.
- ``learning_rate``: The learning rate for the neural network. This hyperparameter
  controls how much the weights of the network are updated at each step of the
  optimization. A larger learning rate will lead to faster training, but might cause
  instability and/or divergence.
- ``batch_size``: The number of samples to use in each batch of training. This
  hyperparameter controls the tradeoff between training speed and memory usage. In
  general, larger batch sizes will lead to faster training, but might require more
  memory.
- ``d_pet``: This hyperparameters controls width of the neural network. In general,
  increasing it might lead to better accuracy, especially on larger datasets, at the
  cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``num_gnn_layers``: The number of graph neural network layers. In general, decreasing
  this hyperparameter to 1 will lead to much faster models, at the expense of accuracy.
  Increasing it may or may not lead to better accuracy, depending on the dataset, at the
  cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``num_attention_layers``: The number of attention layers in each layer of the graph
  neural network. Depending on the dataset, increasing this hyperparameter might lead to
  better accuracy, at the cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``loss``: This section describes the loss function to be used, and it has three
  subsections. 1. ``weights``. This controls the weighting of different contributions
  to the loss (e.g., energy, forces, virial, etc.). The default values of 1.0 for all
  targets work well for most datasets, but they might need to be adjusted. For example,
  to set a weight of 1.0 for the energy and 0.1 for the forces, you can set the
  following in the ``options.yaml`` file under ``loss``:
  ``weights: {"energy": 1.0, "forces": 0.1}``. 2. ``type``. This controls the type of
  loss to be used. The default value is ``mse``, and other options are ``mae`` and
  ``huber``. ``huber`` is a subsection of its own, and it requires the user to specify
  the ``deltas`` parameters in a similar way to how the ``weights`` are specified (e.g.,
  ``deltas: {"energy": 0.1, "forces": 0.01}``). 3. ``reduction``. This controls how the
  loss is reduced over batches. The default value is ``mean``, and the other allowed
  option is ``sum``.
- ``long_range``: In some systems and datasets, enabling long-range Coulomb interactions
  might be beneficial for the accuracy of the model and/or its physical correctness.
  See below for a breakdown of the long-range section of the model hyperparameters.

All Hyperparameters
-------------------

:param name: ``experimental.nativepet``

model
#####

:param cutoff: Cutoff radius for neighbor search
:param cutoff_width: Width of the smoothing function at the cutoff
:param d_pet: Latent feature dimension
:param d_head: Dimension of the attention heads
:param d_feedforward: Dimension of the feedforward network in the attention layer
:param num_heads: Attention heads per attention layer
:param num_attention_layers: Number of attention layers per GNN layer
:param num_gnn_layers: Number of GNN layers
:param zbl: Use ZBL potential for short-range repulsion
:param long_range: Long-range Coulomb interactions parameters:
  - ``enable``: Toggle for enabling long-range interactions
  - ``use_ewald``: Use Ewald summation
  - ``smearing``: Smearing width in Fourier space
  - ``kspace_resolution``: Resolution of the reciprocal space grid
  - ``interpolation_nodes``: Number of grid points for interpolation

training
########

:param distributed: Whether to use distributed training
:param distributed_port: Port for DDP communication
:param batch_size: Training batch size
:param num_epochs: Number of epochs
:param learning_rate: Learning rate
:param scheduler_patience: LR scheduler patience
:param scheduler_factor: LR reduction factor
:param log_interval: Interval to log metrics
:param checkpoint_interval: Interval to save checkpoints
:param scale_targets: Normalize targets to unit std during training
:param fixed_composition_weights: Weights for atomic contributions
:param per_structure_targets: Targets to calculate per-structure losses
:param log_mae: Log MAE alongside RMSE
:param log_separate_blocks: Log per-block error
:param loss: Loss configuration (see above)
:param best_model_metric: Metric used to select best checkpoint (e.g., ``rmse_prod``)

References
----------

.. footbibliography::

Commit message:

Add gradient clipping to NativePET (#557)

docs/src/architectures/nativepet.rst, after:

.. _architecture-nativepet:

NativePET (experimental)
========================

.. warning::

  This is an **experimental model**. You should not use it for anything important.

NativePET is a cleaner, more user-friendly reimplementation of the original
PET model :footcite:p:`pozdnyakov_smooth_2023`. It is designed for better
modularity and maintainability, while preseving compatibility with the original
PET implementation in ``metatrain``. It also adds new features like long-range
features, better fine-tuning implementation, a possibility to train on
arbitrarty targets, and a faster inference due to the ``fast attention``.

Installation
------------

To install NativePET and its dependencies, run the following from the root of the repository:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install metatrain[nativepet]

This will install the model along with necessary dependencies.

Default Hyperparameters
-----------------------

The default hyperparameters for the NativePET model are:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../src/metatrain/experimental/nativepet/default-hypers.yaml
   :language: yaml

Tuning Hyperparameters
----------------------

NativePET offers a number of tuning knobs for flexibility across datasets:

The default hyperparameters above will work well in most cases, but they
may not be optimal for your specific dataset. In general, the most important
hyperparameters to tune are (in decreasing order of importance):

- ``cutoff``: This should be set to a value after which most of the interactions between
  atoms is expected to be negligible. A lower cutoff will lead to faster models.
- ``learning_rate``: The learning rate for the neural network. This hyperparameter
  controls how much the weights of the network are updated at each step of the
  optimization. A larger learning rate will lead to faster training, but might cause
  instability and/or divergence.
- ``batch_size``: The number of samples to use in each batch of training. This
  hyperparameter controls the tradeoff between training speed and memory usage. In
  general, larger batch sizes will lead to faster training, but might require more
  memory.
- ``d_pet``: This hyperparameters controls width of the neural network. In general,
  increasing it might lead to better accuracy, especially on larger datasets, at the
  cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``num_gnn_layers``: The number of graph neural network layers. In general, decreasing
  this hyperparameter to 1 will lead to much faster models, at the expense of accuracy.
  Increasing it may or may not lead to better accuracy, depending on the dataset, at the
  cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``num_attention_layers``: The number of attention layers in each layer of the graph
  neural network. Depending on the dataset, increasing this hyperparameter might lead to
  better accuracy, at the cost of increased training and evaluation time.
- ``loss``: This section describes the loss function to be used, and it has three
  subsections. 1. ``weights``. This controls the weighting of different contributions
  to the loss (e.g., energy, forces, virial, etc.). The default values of 1.0 for all
  targets work well for most datasets, but they might need to be adjusted. For example,
  to set a weight of 1.0 for the energy and 0.1 for the forces, you can set the
  following in the ``options.yaml`` file under ``loss``:
  ``weights: {"energy": 1.0, "forces": 0.1}``. 2. ``type``. This controls the type of
  loss to be used. The default value is ``mse``, and other options are ``mae`` and
  ``huber``. ``huber`` is a subsection of its own, and it requires the user to specify
  the ``deltas`` parameters in a similar way to how the ``weights`` are specified (e.g.,
  ``deltas: {"energy": 0.1, "forces": 0.01}``). 3. ``reduction``. This controls how the
  loss is reduced over batches. The default value is ``mean``, and the other allowed
  option is ``sum``.
- ``long_range``: In some systems and datasets, enabling long-range Coulomb interactions
  might be beneficial for the accuracy of the model and/or its physical correctness.
  See below for a breakdown of the long-range section of the model hyperparameters.

All Hyperparameters
-------------------

:param name: ``experimental.nativepet``

model
#####

:param cutoff: Cutoff radius for neighbor search
:param cutoff_width: Width of the smoothing function at the cutoff
:param d_pet: Latent feature dimension
:param d_head: Dimension of the attention heads
:param d_feedforward: Dimension of the feedforward network in the attention layer
:param num_heads: Attention heads per attention layer
:param num_attention_layers: Number of attention layers per GNN layer
:param num_gnn_layers: Number of GNN layers
:param zbl: Use ZBL potential for short-range repulsion
:param long_range: Long-range Coulomb interactions parameters:
  - ``enable``: Toggle for enabling long-range interactions
  - ``use_ewald``: Use Ewald summation. If False, P3M is used
  - ``smearing``: Smearing width in Fourier space
  - ``kspace_resolution``: Resolution of the reciprocal space grid
  - ``interpolation_nodes``: Number of grid points for interpolation (for PME only)

training
########

:param distributed: Whether to use distributed training
:param distributed_port: Port for DDP communication
:param batch_size: Training batch size
:param num_epochs: Number of epochs
:param learning_rate: Learning rate
:param scheduler_patience: LR scheduler patience
:param scheduler_factor: LR reduction factor
:param log_interval: Interval to log metrics
:param checkpoint_interval: Interval to save checkpoints
:param scale_targets: Normalize targets to unit std during training
:param fixed_composition_weights: Weights for atomic contributions
:param per_structure_targets: Targets to calculate per-structure losses
:param log_mae: Log MAE alongside RMSE
:param log_separate_blocks: Log per-block error
:param grad_clip_norm: Maximum hradient norm value, by default inf (no clipping)
:param loss: Loss configuration (see above)
:param best_model_metric: Metric used to select best checkpoint (e.g., ``rmse_prod``)

References
----------

.. footbibliography::
