docs/src/getting-started/usage.rst, before:

.. _label_basic_usage:

Basic Usage
===========

``metatrain`` is designed for a direct usage from the command line (cli). The program is
registered via the abbreviation ``mtt`` to your command line. The general help of
``metatrain`` can be accessed using

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt --help

We now demonstrate how to ``train`` and ``evaluate`` a model from the command line. For
this example we use the :ref:`architecture-soap-bpnn` architecture and a subset of the
`QM9 dataset <https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/qm9>`_. You can obtain the reduced
dataset from our :download:`website <../../static/qm9/qm9_reduced_100.xyz>`.

Training
########

To train models, ``metatrain`` uses a dynamic override strategy for your training
options. We allow a dynamical composition and override of the default architecture with
either your custom ``options.yaml`` and even command line override grammar. For
reference and reproducibility purposes ``metatrain`` always writes the fully
expanded, including the overwritten option to ``options_restart.yaml``. The restart
options file is written into a subfolder named with the current *date* and *time* inside
the ``output`` directory of your current training run.

The sub-command to start a model training is

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt train

To train a model you have to define your options. This includes the specific
architecture you want to use and the data including the training systems and target
values

The default model and training hyperparameter for each model are listed in their
corresponding documentation page. We will use these minimal options to run an example
training using the default hyperparameters of an SOAP BPNN model

.. literalinclude:: ../../static/qm9/options.yaml
   :language: yaml

For each training run a new output directory in the format
``output/YYYY-MM-DD/HH-MM-SS`` based on the current *date* and *time* is created. We use
this output directory to store checkpoints, the ``train.log`` log file  as well the
restart ``options_restart.yaml`` file. To start the training create an ``options.yaml``
file in the current directory and type

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/basic_usage/usage.sh
    :language: bash
    :lines: 3-8


Evaluation
##########

The sub-command to evaluate an already trained model is

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt eval

Besides the trained ``model``, you will also have to provide a file containing the
system and possible target values for evaluation. The system of this ``eval.yaml``
is exactly the same as for a dataset in the ``options.yaml`` file.

.. literalinclude:: ../../static/qm9/eval.yaml
   :language: yaml

Note that the ``targets`` section is optional. If the ``targets`` section is present,
the function will calculate and report RMSE values of the predictions with respect to
the real values as loaded from the ``targets`` section. You can run an evaluation by
typing

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/basic_usage/usage.sh
    :language: bash
    :lines: 9-24


Molecular simulations
#####################

The trained model can also be used to run molecular simulations.
You can find how in the :ref:`tutorials` section.

Commit message:

Also save models in the `outputs/` directory

docs/src/getting-started/usage.rst, after:

.. _label_basic_usage:

Basic Usage
===========

``metatrain`` is designed for a direct usage from the command line (cli). The program is
registered via the abbreviation ``mtt`` to your command line. The general help of
``metatrain`` can be accessed using

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt --help

We now demonstrate how to ``train`` and ``evaluate`` a model from the command line. For
this example we use the :ref:`architecture-soap-bpnn` architecture and a subset of the
`QM9 dataset <https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/qm9>`_. You can obtain the reduced
dataset from our :download:`website <../../static/qm9/qm9_reduced_100.xyz>`.

Training
########

To train models, ``metatrain`` uses a dynamic override strategy for your training
options. We allow a dynamical composition and override of the default architecture with
either your custom ``options.yaml`` and even command line override grammar. For
reference and reproducibility purposes ``metatrain`` always writes the fully
expanded, including the overwritten option to ``options_restart.yaml``. The restart
options file is written into a subfolder named with the current *date* and *time* inside
the ``output`` directory of your current training run.

The sub-command to start a model training is

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt train

To train a model you have to define your options. This includes the specific
architecture you want to use and the data including the training systems and target
values

The default model and training hyperparameter for each model are listed in their
corresponding documentation page. We will use these minimal options to run an example
training using the default hyperparameters of an SOAP BPNN model

.. literalinclude:: ../../static/qm9/options.yaml
   :language: yaml

For each training run a new output directory in the format
``outputs/YYYY-MM-DD/HH-MM-SS`` based on the current *date* and *time* is created. We
use this output directory to store checkpoints, the ``train.log`` log file  as well
the restart ``options_restart.yaml`` file. To start the training create an
``options.yaml`` file in the current directory and type

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/basic_usage/usage.sh
    :language: bash
    :lines: 3-8

After the training has finished, the ``mtt train`` command generates the ``model.ckpt``
(final checkpoint) and ``model.pt`` (exported model) files in the current directory, as
well as in the ``output/YYYY-MM-DD/HH-MM-SS`` directory.


Evaluation
##########

The sub-command to evaluate an already trained model is

.. code-block:: bash

    mtt eval

Besides the trained ``model``, you will also have to provide a file containing the
system and possible target values for evaluation. The system of this ``eval.yaml``
is exactly the same as for a dataset in the ``options.yaml`` file.

.. literalinclude:: ../../static/qm9/eval.yaml
   :language: yaml

Note that the ``targets`` section is optional. If the ``targets`` section is present,
the function will calculate and report RMSE values of the predictions with respect to
the real values as loaded from the ``targets`` section. You can run an evaluation by
typing

.. literalinclude:: ../../../examples/basic_usage/usage.sh
    :language: bash
    :lines: 9-24


Molecular simulations
#####################

The trained model can also be used to run molecular simulations.
You can find how in the :ref:`tutorials` section.
